# Public Health

## Overview

This section will discuss public health ethics, which explores the tension between individual rights and the public good. During a public health crisis, there is typically a shift between care of individuals and care of the entire population. The new moral calculus introduces many issues, including: how do we weigh the interests of the few against those of the many? What do we owe each other, and what can our government ask of us?

## **Is the Cure Worse Than the Disease?**

Some have suggested that we must be careful that the "cure" for COVID-19 is not worse than the disease itself. By this, they suggest that public health measures, including social distancing, are taking a dramatic toll on our economy, increasing unemployment, and bringing sectors of the economy to a halt. Many people fear that we are at the beginning of a serious recession that will cause untold hardship for millions of Americans over the course of months to years.

Considering the alternative, if we stop social distancing and allow viral spread, a large number of Americans are projected to die, primarily people older than 60 with pre-existing medical conditions, but also many younger people. In the process, hospitals around the country will be forced to make tragic choices regarding who should receive a ventilator, whether patients with COVID-19 should automatically be made DNR, and many other rationing issues raised earlier. Most likely, we will all know someone who has died of the virus if it continues to spread. However, Americans may develop herd immunity soon and be able to return to work and socialize as before. At the same time, it is important to remember that we do not know how long immunity lasts and if people can get re-infected.

It is hard to carefully consider such catastrophic consequences. Most individuals have never experienced a pandemic this severe, but perhaps the subsequent recession will be greater than any recession in American history. With a large portion of the population unemployed, suicide rates could increase, crime could rise, and many people could develop food insecurity. It is improbable that millions of Americans would die of suicide or starvation, but almost everyone’s lives will be affected for the worse, and those of us who are already the most vulnerable may find ourselves in dire straits.

We have to ask ourselves, are the lives of a smaller group of people, in this case, those who may die from COVID-19, worth immense hardship for a larger group of people? Do we value life above all other goods, or is it possible for quality of life considerations to outweigh life? A utilitarian, who values utility or happiness and aims to achieve the greatest utility for the greatest number of people, may prefer to end social distancing and open the economy. A deontologist, who supports the morally correct option over the option with the best results, may prefer to avoid allowing millions of Americans to die. Now approach the problem the other way: how could a utilitarian prefer social distancing and a deontologist prefer allowing viral spread?

**References:**

* [Yong, Ed. "How the Pandemic Will End." March 25, 2020. The Atlantic.](https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2020/03/how-will-coronavirus-end/608719/)

## **Legal Authority During A Pandemic to Enforce Isolation and Quarantine**

Historically, broad powers granted to the government to enforce quarantine have been used to target minority immigrant communities. Therefore, it is important to consider the legal authority and ethical implications of government-enforced isolation and quarantine. Federal isolation and quarantine are authorized by Executive Order of the president, derived from the Commerce Clause of the Constitution and the Public Health Service Act of 1944, which clearly established the federal government’s quarantine authority. After the Ebola and MERS outbreaks, laws were updated to give authority to the U.S. Secretary of HHS to prevent the entry and spread of communicable diseases from foreign countries into and within the U.S. This authority has been delegated to the CDC, which can detain and medically examine people suspected of carrying communicable diseases. Public health powers also stem from the Supreme Court Decision Jacobson v. Massachusetts, which upheld the Massachusetts Board of Health’s authority to require vaccination against smallpox during a smallpox epidemic. Though there is legal authority for the government to enforce quarantine, there is no legal requirement for the government to provide guaranteed salary or essential support, such as medications and food, during quarantine.

This federal authority is limited to isolation and quarantine of individuals suspected to have communicable disease, and those quarantined must be tested within 72 hours. Their length of stay must be defined from the outset. Quarantine orders may be challenged in court. During the Ebola outbreak, a nurse in New Jersey returned from West Africa, where she had treated patients with Ebola. She was quarantined in New Jersey against her will, and she successfully challenged the imposed quarantine. The last time large-scale isolation and quarantine were enforced was during the 1918 Spanish flu. During this pandemic, many cities closed public spaces and prohibited public gatherings. Since then, the CDC has mostly issued health warnings. The last federal quarantine was in the 1960s during a smallpox virus outbreak. 

Thus far during the COVID-19 pandemic, a national quarantine has not been issued, and isolation and quarantine have been left to individual states, which have broad authority. This authority comes from “police powers” granted to states to protect public health. Laws vary from state to state. Thus far, many governors have issued shelter-in-place orders. For instance, California State Governor Gavin Newsom has issued a shelter-in-place order; violating the mandate is a misdemeanor punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both. The federal government does not have the authority to overrule state orders.

Police and law enforcement officers are authorized to enforce public health orders. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection and U.S. Coast Guard are authorized to help enforce federal quarantine orders. In most states, breaking a quarantine order is a criminal misdemeanor. Breaking a federal quarantine order is punishable with fines and imprisonment. 

**References:**

* [CDC: Legal Authorities for Isolation and Quarantine](https://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/aboutlawsregulationsquarantineisolation.html)

## **What Do We Owe Each Other?**

While much of the debate surrounding the COVID-19 public health response centers on the use of government power, we can consider what we owe each other in a time of crisis. In particular, what do the healthiest among us owe to the most vulnerable?

The U.S. has [broken into two camps](https://www.vox.com/the-highlight/2020/3/24/21191184/coronavirus-social-distancing-pandemic-spring-break-keep-calm-carry-on): those that are observant of social distancing and hopeful of flattening the curve and those that have pushed back against public officials’ pleas to stay home. In China, social distancing policies were harder to evade, as officials [closed off apartment complexes](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-health-quarantine/sealed-in-chinese-trapped-at-home-by-coronavirus-feel-the-strain-idUSKCN20G0AY) and [screened millions for elevated temperatures](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/14/business/coronavirus-temperature-sensor-guns.html). Yet, in the U.S., there is a strong sense of letting individual liberties prevail in some parts of the country and “carrying on” despite the ongoing crisis. For example, the Washington Metro issued statements asking that people [not take the Metro](https://wjla.com/news/local/metro-cherry-blossoms-covid-19) to see the cherry blossoms this year, however, the [cherry blossoms continued to draw crowds of people](https://www.wsj.com/articles/washington-d-c-closes-streets-to-prevent-coronavirus-transmission-11584850717). There are countless examples in the news and media of people, including business owners and government officials, defying social distancing policies. These opposing views bring up a common debate in American politics: When do we sacrifice personal liberties to protect the safety of communities?

How we react to this crisis depends on our understanding of when individual rights must be limited in favor of supporting more vulnerable populations. We are social creatures that thrive in groups, meaning we must make certain sacrifices to be a part of that group. [Thomas Hobbes, for example, argues](https://www.tableaufit.com/ethics-and-what-we-owe-each-other/) that we intentionally surrender some of our rights to the government for security and other benefits. T.M. Scanlon, a moral philosopher, [states](https://www.tableaufit.com/ethics-and-what-we-owe-each-other/), “The idea is that actions are wrong if a principle that permitted the action couldn’t be justified to the affected people in the right way.” In other words, people that defy social distancing rules would have to justify their decisions to the community, particularly older and sicker individuals. Communitarianism is a emphasizes the connection between individuals and the community. The principle of “solidarity” asks that we act in a way that supports the most vulnerable members of our community and that we not abandon those in need in a time of crisis. A more personal perspective: we all have a friend or loved one who is vulnerable to COVID-19 - what would we want others to do to protect them?

_Thought questions:_

* What arguments do you see in favor of social distancing? What arguments do you see against those measures? What do we owe each other as members of a community during a crisis?

